please welcome to the stage Raj dut
co-founder and CEO at grafana labs and
Alex kale partner at light
speed all
right feels like a classroom setting
this is good yeah it feels like I'm on a
game show or a late night show or
something like that so this is fun
that's right well great great to be here
folks uh thanks so much for joining us
I'm psyched that we get to chat with Raj
today as you probably can tell from that
video the company's just been an
absolute rocket ship um and us at light
speed have been delighted to get to work
with Raj from the series a uh for those
don't know light speed Global Venture
Capital firm investing really across all
stages and Global investor uh you know
we started investing in Europe over a
decade ago um and so really excited I
get to be here and Raj congrats on what
what is just an incredible company I'd
love to sort of rewind the clock a bit
it's always fun to hear the sort of
founder Story the origin story how did
sort of grafana come to be in the early
days yeah so uh obviously you know the
company is centered around this open
source project that my co-founder tol
odard created uh back in 2014 so uh
that's that's really the origin story is
uh you know was New Year's it was
actually New Year's Day 2014 he released
this project that he'd been working on
um and he'd been working on it all
throughout Christmas and New Years
completely annoying his family being in
the basement in his uh house in
Stockholm and uh you know basically my
other co-founder and I found this
project found t
and the three of us decided to start a
company around it and that was uh almost
10 years ago so that's how the company
got started did you ever think it would
get as big as it is today uh if I'm
being honest absolutely not yeah I think
it's a quality we see of a lot of sort
of humble Founders that sort of you have
this idea in the beginning and then it
sort of blossoms into something and
every stage of the company it's sort of
amazing to see the new limits and sort
of new challenges absolutely I mean I
think our our expectations have been
reset sort of our expectations about
what's possible have been has been reset
almost every year
yeah one decision you made uh really
early on that I want to spend some time
talking about is sort of this decision
to be remote now the company started way
before covid and so you know during Co
obviously a lot of companies had to be
remote because that's how the world
became and now actually what we see is
for for the most part companies have
gone back to the office uh you have
bucked that Trend where you were remote
to begin with you obviously stayed
remote during Co but even now you've
decided to be remote why is that yeah I
mean we really believe in rem and it's
remote first not remote friendly to be
clear and I think there's a there's a
big difference with that and we we feel
really strongly about that it's like you
can make an office culture work you can
make a remote culture work but I think
when you try to mix it up you really get
into trouble um but it really started
from the beginning of the company right
Cu uh three co-founders one in you know
I was in New York uh my uh tol was in
Sweden and Anthony was in Australia so
it doesn't get much worse than that in
terms of time zone coverage and so from
the very beginning we were remote um you
know always felt that uh Talent was
Global um you know a bunch of us love to
travel I've been on the road you know
since Co basically you know it's fun
building an international uh business
and then there's there's examples um of
some of the best software in the world
that have been created by you know
geographically distributed teams working
in a async manner right I mean uh take a
look at something like the Linux kernel
right that's uh you know the way that
you build uh you know very high quality
software is kind of proven out and
you're right before covid this was a
little bit unique um you know it was a
recruiting Advantage we tell people like
you know come work at gra Labs we're a
remote company and they go wow that's
amazing and now it's like yawn you know
whatever um which is unfortunate from a
recruiting standpoint um but uh I
wouldn't I wouldn't do it any other way
and uh I think the the interesting thing
is that um you know we're in 40 plus
different countries and uh I think we
get a really good perspective from you
know across the team um and you know
even our customer support and our on
call shifts we generally don't have to
people generally don't have to wake up
to deal with an issue right so our
support kind of follows the sun which is
also really nice yeah you said New York
Sweden and Australia for the three
co-founders that definitely makes it
spicy for for time zones you're you're
now 1,200 people I guess you know the
sort of the biggest knock that I hear
you know for companies that are remote
uh is the culture piece the fact that
it's not as easy to built culture uh you
know you're not as often together how do
you how do you do that at grao what's
what's with the approach it's definitely
harder um and that's kind of back to
this point that I think there's a
difference between remote first and
remote friendly um so if you're remote
first you can really try to build a
culture that's you know really
purpose-built to be remote right because
if you're remote friendly I think the
pattern that you get into often is
you're basically you're basically going
to have a almost second class career if
you're a remote employee at a remote
friendly company cuz you're just not
going to be part of the water cooler
conversations you're not going to be
close to the center of power and
decision-making you know people so it's
really hard to be remote friendly I
think but when you're remote first you
can make an attempt at least to fix the
culture and and purpose build the
culture to be remote I think you need to
get the team together pretty often even
as a remote company how often we uh so
we used to we still joke um and kind of
nervously laugh when talking to VCS like
like you guys and the some of the
comments are often like oh you're remote
that's that's great you'll save a lot of
money on office space and I go yeah but
we're going to spend it all back and
more on
travel um so we get the we generally get
every person in the company um either
together at a all company event or a
team event like generally two or three
times a year so and how often is your
exact Team all in the same room we get
in the same room
about five or six times a year five or
six times yeah and I guess from a uh
sort of hiring perspective what have you
seen does it mean you can hire people
that traditionally you know you wouldn't
have recruited what in remote first does
that mean there's no physical office
space at gra exactly no physical office
um you know even when we have a lot of
people in a single City and we allow
people to go get Wei works we don't
allow people to be in the same Wei work
which is ridiculous right so like let's
say we have uh a bunch of people in
Berlin and uh let's say we have 20
people who want to get Wei works we
won't allow people to be in the same Wei
workor because that creates an office it
creates a hub right we'll be like just
you know go into 10 different weworks
around Berlin that's incredible which
upsets people but that's uh that's part
of the way we try to build a remote for
I'm imagining these like Shadow we work
slack groups that the co doesn't know
about you know where it's like they're
sort of happen to show up at the same
coffee shop Monday to Friday
um that that's very cool and and I guess
from a uh sort of going forward
perspective any plans to change this or
you're 1,200 people now 2000 and then
10,000 at some point no no plans to
change it I think it's pretty much built
into our DNA at this point I think it's
it's definitely got its disadvantages
don't get me wrong I mean uh you know
what would you say are the biggest
disadvantages I mean there's there's a
feeling whenever we get people together
for a few days um you know after an
offsite you know at the end of the
offsite people go like oh man this was
great imagine if we were you know all
all together all the time the amount of
work we'd get done and I don't think
that's necessarily true because you
couldn't keep up that level of energy
all the time right and it's I think it's
good to kind of get people together do
some planning and then go off and and
execute but there's no doubt that if
everyone was in the same office um you
know we we'd kind of have easier
communication we'd have you know we'd be
able to ramp people faster we'd be able
to hire more Junior people but then the
trade-off is you know again Talent is
global and we wouldn't be we wouldn't
have been able to put together the
incredible team that we have today if we
were all say in all in San Francisco or
something like that yeah I'm curious by
by a show of hands how many folks here
are fully
remote that's that's actually a good
number for for the ones that didn't
raise their hand any advice that you
would give in terms of something that
you've done from hey whether it's the
way you document things the way you do
communication you know recording
sessions I'm just curious like from uh
this issue of time time zones and you
know even for companies that are not
fully distributed and fully remote you
still have this issue of collaboration
and sort of sometimes I think the the
second class citizens that are not in HQ
Y and I think companies like you that
have sort of pioneered this you know
1,200 people there is no one office
there's there's things that have
happened there from a process and
internal sort of you know setup that
allows for that to happen is there
anything that you know comes to mind
there that you'd really recommend
everyone do I don't think there's
there's one silver bullet or you know
any kind of like very uh sort of uh
obvious thing that we do I mean like
there there's a few things right we we
try to have we try to be very async in
our Communications we try to write a lot
of things down record a lot of meetings
uh record a lot of zooms um you know
allow people to consume information sort
of on their own schedule on their own
time zone um initially it was really
hard having teams that were spread
across different time zones but but with
scale you get to solve of those problems
by you know being able to have local
leaders and you know in in every time
zone and and teams that aren't
necessarily split all across the world
um but it's definitely harder it
definitely takes more work um I think
the there's more demands placed on
people managers to kind of be better
people managers honestly and and not
sort of uh you know rely on shoulder
surfing or people you know being you
know ad hoc conversations you have to
kind of plan things more um but I
wouldn't say there's a silver bullet and
honestly we're still figuring it out and
it's definitely far from perfect so yeah
I love that you're investing though on
the sort of the the office Savings in in
travel because I I heard this term the
other day that resonated the sort of
trust battery and when you're on Zoom
you sort of over time you deplete that
and then as soon as you get back
together you sort of refill this battery
and then it gives you the chance to sort
go another three months before seeing
people in person and so it feels like
that that's just a critical part you
know at the end of the day we're social
human creatures and bringing people
together just feels 100% agree 100%
agree I think and that's why it's really
important to get the the team together
because when when you're fully remote
you know and everyone's just a box on a
on a screen on a zoom it's easy to think
that you're almost like playing a video
game and these people aren't real and uh
you know it's easier to uh you know
pardon my language it's easier to be an
to someone that you don't
actually know it's easier to not give
those people the benefit of the doubt
and when you meet people in person and
you know go out to dinner you know have
have a beer with your colleagues that
really matters it's not just a touchy
feely thing there is something
fundamentally human and innate that
builds trust like you say and I I I I
hadn't heard the term trust battery but
that that really resonates and makes a
lot of sense to me because recharging
that trust battery is what these you
know events and offsites and uh are all
about yeah I love it I want to switch
gears a little bit uh you know in the
video that was on uh we you know it was
kind of incredible to see some of the go
you know I saw NASA using grafana which
is really cool um and one one of the
decisions that you've had to make is
sort of how to approach monetization and
when to do that and how to do it uh and
that's often times you know for an open
source company one of the biggest
decisions to make um can you just give
us a little bit of insight as to sort of
how that came to be in terms of how you
all approached it sure yeah
so the first few years of the company we
didn't think at all about monetization
and those were like our innocent salad
days that I look back on fondly cuz we
had no customers uh no Revenue no
responsibilities we were just trying to
fund days fund days exactly uh no
VCS and uh we were just you know trying
to build uh really popular open source
uh software and build a community and uh
look the the the goals of Open Source
and the goals of our you know commercial
Ambitions are in stark contrast to each
other right like open source is all
about value creation and our go to
market teams are all about value capture
and balancing those things is honestly
really hard um and we we struggle with
it all the time we struggle with it
every day and I think if we stop
struggling with that balance that'll be
the day that like something is going
wrong um and you know our open source
software is Not By Any Means
Weare it's not uh you know it's not uh
demoware it's it's used by some of the
largest companies in the world who don't
pay us you mentioned NASA they're not a
customer right we have uh not a paying
customer not a paying customer exactly
we we use the word we use the word
customer at Graf to mean a Pay customer
right and uh so we have almost a million
companies using grafana and we have
about 6,000 customers right so if you do
the math that's less than 1% of the
people using grafana pay us um and you
know when we first started talking to uh
uh when we first started raise money and
you know in fact uh obviously light
speeed was was the first VC that we
started working with we had a slide of
logos and they were really impressive
logos but none of the logos were
customers and uh our pitch was sort of
like look we have all these amazing
companies using our software we will
figure out over time how to make some of
these companies customers um and uh and
we've done that but uh the balance is
really hard we try to have features and
capabilities that we hold back that
really appeal to large Enterprises more
so than you know the the kind of
startups and the the mid-market uh
companies um you know things around uh
you know compliance and security and um
but it's it's a really tough balance and
uh you know I'd say that the the
landscape of Open Source companies is
something that has changed dramatically
over the last few years and something
we've watched closely right so when we
started there were a ton of Open Source
companies that we looked up to and
admired and grew Drew inspiration from
right there was like red hat there was
uh mongod DB elastic search redis uh
Hashi Corp and sort of over the last few
years every single one of these
companies has decided that you know uh
being an open source company with with a
OSI license is not the right decision
for them and look I I still admire these
companies and obviously they they're
going to make the decision that makes
the most sense for us for them but for
us you know we're still an open source
company and most of the work that we do
is under an OSI license but it's feeling
it's feeling pretty lonely these days
because uh I we're we're sort of one of
the last remaining open source companies
at scale um but we're still figuring out
how to how to balance value capture with
value creation and uh I think having the
cloud offering was a big unlock for us
because as a delivery model cloud is an
a very nice delineation to be like if
you want to use our cloud service and
consume all this stuff that we have in a
supported scalable way you're obviously
going to pay us um but then the the
whole dynamic between open source and
the hyperscale cloud vendors is a whole
another topic too so yeah and I'm sure
that helps from a margin perspective the
fact that once they're you know hosting
it in the cloud with you then you know
otherwise there's a sort of potential
impact on yeah yep and what's been the I
mean I guess a lot of those companies
that you mentioned the sort of GS in
open source most of those are now public
companies do is that what do you think
is driving that sort of decision you
become public and you know there's more
of a focus on driving the revenue I I I
don't know I mean uh I'm not here to
speculate on what other companies are
are thinking yeah fair enough and I
guess on uh sort of in your mind the
6,000 to a million it's a pretty
staggering sort of ratio in terms of how
how much usage there is of grafana and
how many are you know customers as you
say you know paid paid customers is that
is there a cap in your mind in terms of
what that becomes does it matter you
know how do you sort of you know Drive
the business around that is that even
one of the things that you've focus on I
mean we we look at that stat right we we
sit we sit around sometimes and we go
like wow we've kind of monetized less
than 1% of the people that are using
grafana but at the end of the day we we
really want to you know we want to make
the the overall piie as big as possible
and we know that our entire business
model is sort of predicated on capturing
a small piece of what is hopefully an
extremely large pie right I don't think
it would be feasible for us to
make more than uh a low single digigit
percentage of grafana users customers
like we have so many companies and
individuals using grafana for all sorts
of crazy things that you know they would
never have budget to ra budget to to pay
us right we have you know tens of
thousands of people using uh grafana for
like home lab stuff to monitor how how
their sour dough is uh is is being baked
they uh you know or you know what sort
of uh media their Plex servers are are
pirating that day or uh you know what uh
you know how their EV is charging I mean
all sorts of things like that and so
like we're not really going trying to
monetize that that part of the community
right but when we you know when we
discover that there's a a large global
bank using grafana then we become really
interested we're like how can we how can
we you know make sure that we monetize
that customer but a lot of our product
strategy is is kind of set around that
Dynamic right we're we're very much set
up to want to monetize people who have
you know more money than time right in
my mind I'm thinking of the sort of
graan powered Bakery which is like yeah
that's
awesome seeing that uh today uh the
companies obviously been incredibly
successful you know you've crossed 250
million of ARR which is just amazing
um I'm curious you know it it feels like
on that Journey there's probably call it
3 four five chapters of a stage of
company you know you talked about the
sort of the very initial days where it
was just Community focused only no
funding yet
bootstrapped um what are some of the
chapters since then I mean as you think
about that Journey from 0 to 1200
employees 0 to 250 million plus of ARR
what are some of the sort of markers in
your mind and what's changed in each of
those yeah that's a that's a really good
question so you know the the first stage
you know sort of stage zero as it were
right was like no sales no customers we
were just focused on building the
community nurturing the community
building open source software giving it
away for free you know our our business
plan at stage zero was you know
literally like step
one you know build freely available open
source software step two question mark
step three profit right we didn't know
what the what step two was and that was
the the first stage of the company that
was the first few years and then stage
one if you will was really around our
our core open source project Gana itself
right I'm curious how many people here
use grafana whether you're a customer or
a
user it's cool it's awesome um but
obviously like the company it's named
grafana Labs graan is still at the
center of everything we do so we wanted
to have a product around grafana itself
right so the first step that we took was
we essentially made an Enterprise
version of grafana and all we sold was
the visualization layer right and
because grafana is all about data
visualization and we had no sales team
it was just the kind of founding the
founders and the the founding employees
sort of just trying to do sales and
figure out pattern match and figure out
how to you know like what resonated what
we had to build um you know tried to to
make it a little bit repeatable and so
that that was sort of stage one for us
and then stage two
I think you know we went we became uh a
multi-product company right we knew that
we needed to do more than just
visualization to to Really you know
build a build a large business
particularly in the observability space
we we we knew that we needed to build uh
you know some databases basically right
to to store data because that was where
all the pain was and that was quite
frankly where all the the money was um
and so we built out these open- Source
metrics databases around Prometheus
uh we built out uh open source logging
back end called Loki we built out open
source tracing called Tempo uh we bought
a company uh called pyroscope for
profiles and so we kind of built out
this this whole stack as it as it were
right and so how big were you when you
became multiproduct we
were we were about 60 people yeah about
60 people and uh we probably had
about uh May maybe 5 or $10 million in
in Revenue um and yeah going
multiproduct was a was a pretty big deal
for us and I think a lot of a lot of
companies struggle with it and we
certainly zigged and zagged too but
luckily we we managed to make that
transition and then really the the third
stage was going fully all in into Cloud
right so we actually deploy a lot of the
new features that we develop on our
Cloud first and then like kind of
backport them if you will into open
source which is kind of the the opposite
of how one might think you you would
intuitively do it um and kind of along
the way through stage one stage two
stage three we've not only grown but
we've shifted our Revenue mix pretty
dramatically right so in the early days
all our Revenue came from grafana
visualization today um grafana is
actually you know not even our our our
biggest product like our metrics product
is is bigger than grafana itself
although grafana has you know all the
brand recognition and uh you know the
adoption right and uh you know stage one
stage two we were still selling a lot of
on-prem software and licensed software
whereas today most of our Revenue comes
from graphon cloud our our SAS offering
and so as we've grown we've kind of
become a multi-product company but also
shifted from on-prem to cloud and then
also pretty dramatically shifted our
whole go to market team and go to market
motion right like we've we've built an
Enterprise sales team pretty fast pretty
dramatically in the last um you know
three or four years basically and that
that's kind of fascinating to think
about how early you became multiproduct
I mean that's you know typically in the
Journey of a lot of companies we see
that happen later what drove that in
your mind was it sort of just customer
feedback pulling in that direction was
it an Insight you had on the
market it was it was customer feedback
I'd say um you know we'd we'd go into
customers or potential customers and you
know see what they were doing with
observability and realize sort of like
the intensity of their infrastructure
and you know grafana itself is so
lightweight right so they'd be like yeah
like we love grafana and like you know
it runs on a VM and it runs for a
thousand users and it's great and you
know no problem and you know we don't
have any issues scaling it but meanwhile
like for our logs or our metrics like oh
my God like we have you know a thousand
servers running our you know uh needed
to support these workloads and that was
sort of eye openening for us um and and
you know like with grafana we charge by
the seat right and uh we really wanted
to get to a model that was more
consumption based and we didn't really
see a way to do that with just having
grafana right and also customers quite
frankly told us that if if we wanted
them to kind of bet on graphon labs for
observability then we needed to have a a
full observability platform right um I
mean the thing about grafana is uh
it works with every single backend right
whether you're using data dog or New
Relic or Prometheus or you know whatever
it'll it'll allow you to visualize data
from anywhere but a lot of our customers
said that that's great we love it but we
want you to provide the full stack end
to end and so our customers kind of
pushed us to to basically develop our
own databases which we did that's
amazing it's always great to get that
pull from the market when start building
product and I'm curious on that Journey
you know you know one of the I think
being a Founder is incredibly hard uh
not just because you're building
something out of thin air and out of
nothing and it's you know the roller
coaster that we all know it is but also
because you sort of have to reinvent
yourself as an individual I'm sure your
sort of management style when you were
just the three of you versus when you
were 30 300 now 1,200 um and that also
that founder relationship evolves how
have you sort of seen your management
style evolve as a Founder what has been
the sort of hardest part from from going
from Z to 12200 folks in your
mind yeah know it's it's a really good
question and uh it's been really
challenging and I think I think a lot of
people here are are probably going
through similar similar things right
because you you have
to sort of reset and
redefine you know how how you interact
with the with the rest of the company at
every level of scale right um you know
it going from a a company that was you
know 30 40 people where I knew every
single detail and was involved in you
know almost every single decision to now
you know quite frankly not even knowing
who works at the company has been really
like challenging and I I think I've had
to every year reset sort of how I
interact with the company and at this
point um you know my level of influence
is really around sort of the senior
leadership team and making sure that we
have the right people um that are you
know in the right spots at the right
time that are hopefully aligned and then
just you know trusting them to you know
kind of uh you know get it done so to
speak and just personally speaking
that's been really challenging for me um
and I'm still struggling to figure this
out with every level of scale right I
mean i' I've never done this at this
scale before so you know it's like
you're you're constantly figuring out
what altitude to fly at right like um
you know in the early days you can fly
like above you know in in in the in the
trees right and now I feel like I'm kind
of almost like a satellite and that
feels annoying quite frankly at times
but you know um yeah I mean still
figuring it out and don't claim to have
the uh the answers on that yeah yeah
thank you for sharing that and it's I
love that analogy of sort of like every
year having to reset that and and you
know to your point it's like a 30 40
people you've probably even hired you
know you've been the final interviewer
for a lot of those people
um to you know today it's really about
driving the management team and the
executive team um have you in terms of
bringing amazing people around you and
hiring folks uh is there a lesson you've
learned there in terms of being better
at
that it's really tough I mean I think
that
um lessons around hiring I think
we I think a lesson that I've learned is
not to over opt not to over index on
someone's resum
right like it's tempting to look at
someone's background and you know look
at all the amazing companies that
they've worked at and and sort of think
like wow okay so this person's had this
experience at all these companies that
you know maybe you admire or you think
it you know is is applicable to your
business and you know you kind of can
get wowed by someone saying well I have
this Playbook and I I can apply my
playbook to your company and at this
point that just scares me I'm like what
do you mean you can apply your playbook
to a company that you don't even even
know yet that that that's ridiculous
right and so um I think that would be
the only that would be probably the main
lesson learned is you know optimize for
things like uh Drive grit um you know uh
intelligence um you know willingness to
to learn um you know uh culture fit as
it were and you know those things matter
a lot and I think uh you know while it's
nice to have different experiences or
have worked at different companies I
think in the early days we we sort of
over indexed on that or got wowed by
that right um and so um yeah I think I
think at this point the idea of someone
applying a Playbook that they have to a
com to you know before they've even you
know barely walked in the DOR gra Labs
like really gives me the the Shivers so
yeah I love that it's sort of like the
importance of first principal thinking
opposed to just like copy pasting oh I
did it this way here I'll just do the
same exact thing and it's you know some
some folks that sort of beginner's mind
and you look for that when you're hiring
your exec team that's awesome I have one
or two more questions and I'd love to
open it up to the group so uh if if you
have questions we will take them um
grafana is your second company and I'm
just curious uh you know what what do
you feel like being a second time
founder how does that change both in
terms of you know the ability to build
something that's you know super valuable
and and uh has had the success it has
had but also in terms of some of the
lessons learned from the the first time
around sort of having an impact on you
know grafana I I love this question
because I I actually uh just kind of
gave a a similar answer uh at one of our
recent go to market qbrs um so for me
personally and I I I I think this will
resonate maybe with people here
particularly Founders that are you know
very product oriented and I think a lot
of Founders are right uh so there were
two things that were big lessons for me
one was
at my previous startup we didn't take
sales and go to market seriously enough
right we thought and we were super naive
in this um but we thought that if we
built a great product that the world
would beat a path to our door right and
uh we almost laughed at uh the idea of
having a you know Enterprise sales team
or the need to you know uh take
customers out to stake dinners or you
know talk to the CIO we we thought
literally like we're just going to focus
on building a great product and somehow
world will discover our great product
and buy it and that is so that was so
incredibly naive and but an easy pattern
to fall into and we we really tried to
overcompensate the other way on on
graffo Labs right so we took go to
market very seriously we really thought
about it from the beginning um you know
we we wanted to build and and have a a
worldclass sales team um so that's one
learning um and the
other my last startup was was really
under capitalized right so we were
always struggling to make payroll um it
was a capex intensive Data Center
business right so like every excess
dollar that we had we'd used to like try
to buy more servers right and uh we'd
we'd always be late on payroll we
couldn't buy enough servers and we
couldn't essentially execute on the the
opportunity that we had and so we also
didn't want to make that mistake right
which is why we ended up talking to to
people like you guys at light speed
right because we didn't want we wanted
to have enough
cash in the bank to be able to do the
things that we knew made sense so I
think those were the two big Lessons
Learned right take go to market
seriously because having a good product
isn't enough and you know have enough
cash on the balance sheet to be able to
execute on the the opportunity that you
have and uh yeah I mean in in many ways
Graff Labs is like a doover for me and a
lot of the people who also worked at the
the last company right we want to do we
want to do the things that again that
worked but not make the mistakes that we
made at the last company and I think
yeah that's really neat yeah it's so
tempting the sort of founder journey to
build it and they will come just build a
great product and hope I wish the world
worked that way wouldn't that be great
but it
doesn't it it's uh it is a hard lesson
though and I think what one uh one thing
that's particularly interesting what you
just mentioned is uh that transition
from being sort of very R&D focused to
also having a sales marketing team and
in my experience there's always tension
between those two sides of the house you
know the R&D team is like can't the
sales team just sell the things we have
and the go to market team goes to R&D
and goes can't you just build a product
you know the product that customers want
uh how did you manage that tension and
how do you sort of keep that R&D core
which is so important to everything
grafana has become but at the same time
recognize that importance of sort of the
go to market piece yeah um so the the
the tension you just mentioned I think
that that exists I've seen that exist in
in pretty toxic ways at a lot of
different companies right where
essentially the the R&D team doesn't
have a relationship with a go to market
team and those teams basically hate each
other don't respect each other at all um
and almost have contempt for each other
um so I'd like to think that
we don't really have that problem at
graffo labs and I think the one of the
main reasons is we really want our R&D
team to be pretty focused on customers
talking to customers involved in deals
um you know like we we don't like our a
pattern for us is we want to hire
Engineers who are involved in sales
Cycles are involved in customers to you
know are involved uh you know talk to
customers all the time a lot of
companies kind of hide their Engineers
from customers or put like a lot of
buffers or processes where customers and
Engineers can never interact and I think
that that can be dangerous although I
understand why companies do that um but
I honestly that's that's also where a
lot of my effort uh as as CEO today is
is put is is is trying to make sure that
the relationship between R&D and go to
market is is productive um you know and
so um yeah I mean because back to the
open source balance too right I think uh
you know the the stereotypical view is
kind of true our our average person in
the go to market team would hope that
every feature that we develop does not
go into open source and our average R&D
engineer would hope that every feature
that we develop does go into open source
right so um yeah that tension tough um
at grafana we we have a great uh C and
you know he really encapsulates uh Dave
really encapsulates sort of this idea of
we're all in customer success uh you
know no matter your your job function
and um you know it's really a team sale
uh AC acronal Labs like uh we have a
slack Channel where you know every deal
we win uh the rep kind of summarizes the
deal why we want it and who was involved
in the deal and one of the things that
like I really like is in in almost all
of those posts there's like dozens of
people mentioned in every deal not just
on the sales team and that's really cool
that's awesome great way to sort of
drive that cultural alignment and give
credit and I love that point around
giving sort of non-s salese exposure to
customers I've seen in our in our sort
of portfolio in general the impact that
drives in terms of what people were able
to build and the empathy it drives for
customers and you're not just building
an isolation that's amazing yeah the
empathy that's a really good point Alex
like you know like because it that
empathy drives a lot of the day-to-day
product decisions when you have empathy
for for your customers right and we're
in a we're lucky enough where it's not
like we're building I don't know Tac
software where you know our Engineers
they're kind of also subject matter
experts in the kind of software that
they're building because they use it
every day right we use our own software
to to you know run our cloud service so
they almost that empathy is is almost
felt not only on behalf of customers but
our own teams and that's sort of a
really nice feedback cycle too that's
awesome well uh I've learned a lot
already I mean just some sort of
highlights for me the The Importance of
Being remote first and the
intentionality that you bring to that uh
Second is this sort of focus on
community and not just modernization and
how to drive that balance uh third is
obviously the sort of Reinventing of the
of of your role and that that impact
it's had in terms of you know every year
sort of really defining what your your
job as a CEO is for the company and how
that changes every year and then lastly
so much around the culture of driving
that alignment so I I hope it's become
obvious in this conversation to all of
you as it has been at light speed for a
long time how lucky we are to have
partnered with Raj and uh thank you so
much for that Raj so we're GNA open it
up to questions if um if folks I believe
there's two mics on either
side I also wanted to thank you Alex you
know and light speed because you guys
were the the first people you know
almost uh 5 years ago who you know
believed that we uh had a business so
really appreciate you also thank you so
much yeah it's been a pleasure yeah
please great hi Raj yeah over this way
uh quick question I'm curious how you
handle compensation across 60 countries
so for example is an engineer paid the
same regardless of location or is it
more location specific it's absolutely
location specific and uh I'm pretty
opinionated on this I know there's a lot
of talk about like aligning on global
compensation and to me that just seems
absolutely insane so for us it's
absolutely location specific um you know
an engineer in the Bay Area does not
make the same amount of money as uh you
know an engineer in uh say Eastern
Europe thank
you yeah hi Raj thank you really really
good session I appreciate it the the
consumption model that you're you're
pursuing with the clan
what are your thoughts on that Jason Lin
talked about a push back on spend do you
have concerns about that in the long
term are you getting push back are you
thinking about other models yeah so you
know for for us consumption model you
know what I mean by that is it's just
you know tied to the amount of data that
you that you send us um and one of the
things that we've done and I think
companies like AWS have been pretty
Progressive with this also is we
so about a year and a half half ago we
had an internal conversation where we
basically acknowledged that the entire
observability space had done a pretty
terrible job in aligning the consumption
costs especially when you look at the
the data volumes that have just been
exploding exponentially with the value
that customers get from that exploding
data right so like data's been been kind
of going exponential but the value that
customers get from that data is maybe
growing linearly maybe sublinearly maybe
even like Asm totically right and so um
you know we have a capability on our
Cloud which is now a differentiator
versus our open source called adaptive
Telemetry and so what that does is it
basically analyzes what data you're
sending us and allows you to start
dropping data that you're not using and
when we launch this feature you can
imagine our sales team were were
completely freaked out um they were like
how can we do this because literally
like you know all our deals are going to
Get shrunk in size um I remember having
conversations with our board um same
sort of reaction like are are you sure
you want to do this like you're
literally going to you know shrink your
own customers right and uh so I I think
to to to kind of answer your question
like we we believe in the consumption
model but sort of with some caveats and
that's reflected in our product strategy
and have we taken have we lost millions
and millions of dollars of Revenue
because of that product strategy
absolutely um but you know we have a a
cultural tenant that we stole from
Goldman Sachs where we say we're greedy
but we're long-term greedy right and so
that's sort of like a manifestation of
that long-term greedy strategy so we
still believe in the consumption model
but I think you've you've got to sort of
be nuanced in your approach for it and
make sure that you know you're you're
kind of aligned with customer value and
there's a lot of businesses out there
that are consumption based that are you
know data volume based that I think are
you know sort of struggling with that
just just like we continue to
do is it 100% consumption based now so
we still price both by seat as well as
by consumption on on data um but the
overwhelming majority of our revenue is
consumption base yeah Excell thanks for
the talk um really interested in the
point around linking the R&D and the
sales team um have you found any other
ways to encourage or incentivize
Engineers or people on the R&D side to
be involved in sales Cycles outside of
kind of shouting out success and
involvement um at the end of a closed
deal yeah a few things like um let me
think of a few examples so like many
companies we have a uh the equivalent of
a president's club right um and normally
a president's Club as as I'm sure most
of you know or have been familiar with
is like a a reward trip for your best
salespeople like we call it um you know
grafana club and we actually invite not
just the best salese but the the the
engineers and the lawyers and you know
the the HR people who you know exemplify
being the best of of graphin estas with
a focus on people who helped with
closing deals right and so you know that
that's one example um another example is
we have these hackathons every single
quarter where we encourage our Engineers
to team up with let's say our sees um or
in some cases even um you know other
people on our go to market teams and
they kind of you know present projects
back to the company and uh so a lot of
our road map is driven by not just our
Engineers very bottoms up but also our
our se's and it's funny because you see
our Engineers team up with r SE and a
lot of the winners of our internal
hackathons win because their
presentations are so good and the reason
their presentations are so good is
because they have an SE presenting you
know and collaborating with an engineer
and so that Dynamic is also also good
but just you know look for all these
little things I think and they and they
add up right just I I I think people put
too many boundaries in in between sales
and and R&D and we just try to break
those boundaries down also optimize who
you're hiring right like uh if you know
we try not to hire Engineers who you
know would say that oh like talk to a
customer I'd never want to do that well
then okay well maybe maybe grao Labs
isn't the right company for you thanks y
this is also I think where the sort of
remote has a big impact because in a lot
of companies you have salese that are in
every day and the engineers are in once
or twice and they're at home and so
there is a bit of that natural
disconnect yep in sort of the office
space I think it's also speaks to that
remote yeah I think that's fair benefit
amazing well thank you Raj so much this
was super fun and very insightful please
join me in thanking Raj for his
insights thanks Alex